You know, think of it like little
siblings and like, you know, the big
sibling is just like sitting on the
little one and he can't breathe.
Uh, you know, the court is trying to get
the president to stop sitting on
Congress.
>> Has Donald Trump's pursuit of unbridled
executive power
changed the very nature of the
presidency?
>> I don't know how it can be challenged.
Find a rogue judge. You got a lot of
rogue judges.
>> Or has a powerful Supreme Court already
thwarted his revolution?
>> The tariffs Donald Trump announced back
in April on Liberation Day are gone.
They have been ruled illegal by this US
Supreme Court.
>> we can say this is one of the most
significant Supreme Court losses for a
US president in modern history.
>> My guest this week argues that the
Supreme Court is more than just a
firewall against Donald Trump. It's the
real power center in American democracy
right now. She's a lawyer, a
conservative court watcher, and the
author of the new book Last Branch
Standing.
Sarah Isgur, welcome to Interesting
Times.
>> Thanks for having me.
>> So, we're going to talk about the
Supreme Court,
um, the divisions within the court, its
influence over American politics, and
the future of the Constitution, really.
We're going to get to some big
questions, but we're going to start
where all things must start, with
President Donald J. Trump and executive
power.
Because in we're about a year and a few
months into the second Trump
administration, and in the first three
to six months of the administration all
anyone wanted to talk about with
constitutional questions was just how
much power his administration was
consolidating,
uh, in all kinds of different domains.
And I want to give you a chance to talk
about where that revolution stands. How
successful has been his attempt to
remake the presidency's powers?
>> There's very little that Donald Trump
has done. In fact, I'm hard-pressed to
think of anything that is wholly unique.
What Donald Trump has done is turn the
amp up to 11 on places that his
predecessors has had built on in the
past. So, on the one hand, we can go
back to Obama's pen and phone moment,
right?
>> I've got a pen
and I've got a phone.
And I can use that pen to sign executive
orders and take executive actions and
administrative actions that move the
ball forward.
>> In a lot of ways, you can see Trump
doing a much bigger pen and a much
bigger phone and really having all of
government by executive action.
In another lens, you could go all the
way back to the progressive era, you
know, Teddy Roosevelt and Woodrow Wilson
progressive era, where they think, uh
you know, Congress is a bunch of
dum-dums coming from wherever. What if
we did government by experts in the
executive branch? And instead of having
Congress decide this, we'll have the
smartest people because there are right
and wrong answers. And instead of
representative democracy that's so
passé, we will have basically this
constitutional revolution and move power
from Congress over to the executive
branch. So, in another sense, Trump is
the end point of this 100-year
experiment that we've been running of,
"Meh, let's just have the presidency do
it all."
>> So, it's the end point. So, where are we
ending, right? Like, what has Trump
actually succeeded in
claiming and where have his claims
fallen short or not achieved as much as
it looked like they might?
>> I say it's an end point because it is so
obviously failed. He has failed to
implement any of his major policy
initiatives through executive order in
any realistic sense. You think about
Alien Enemies Act, uh federalizing the
National Guard, worldwide tariffs,
birthright citizenship, these are the
main pillars of Donald Trump's policy
presidency, the substantive aspects of
it, and they've all failed with the
exception of birthright citizenship,
which is going to
>> What about Trump's campaign for what you
might call legal retribution against his
enemies, right? Cuz this is another area
where there was a lot of aggressive
movement, and you you know, who is an
enemy? You could define that to include
the, you know, goal of prosecuting James
Comey, you could define it to include
the president's campaigns against
universities, against law firms. Where
Where does that particular campaign
stand? And again, we're talking, I
guess, a few weeks after
Trump fired his attorney general, Pam
Bondi, seemed to be primarily related to
the Jeffrey Epstein story, like all
things are ultimately. But it was also
the sense that, you know, she had been
in charge of conducting this campaign,
and the campaign was not going well. But
how do you How do you assess that
campaign after a year or so?
>> Legally, it has failed at every turn.
You can't point to success in the
retribution campaign, and by the way, my
list, I think, looks identical to yours.
It's not just the individuals, the
entities as well.
That being said, politically, I think
it's been very successful. So,
I don't think Trump cares that much
about losing in court. I think,
probably, he's pretty satisfied with
that, which,
>> Do you think Do you think so? Why did I
guess I looked at the Bondi firing, and
I said, "Oh, you know,
even though she was willing to do all
these things for Trump, he still wasn't
satisfied." My sense is that maybe he
would have been satisfied if just one
one of these cases had ended like if if
just one presidential enemy had been
convicted.
>> Well,
let's say this. Uh there's a way to lose
competently, and there's a way to lose
incompetently. I think President Trump
doesn't like displays of incompetence.
Uh they're going to lose those cases no
matter who the prosecutor is, but
culturally, I mean, we're sitting here
talking about it. I think we can all
point to
um
you know, areas that that has affected.
Universities are a great example, by the
way, of all sorts of university changes
that are downstream from this effort.
And so, you know, I focus on law stuff,
but
it's obvious to me that the the legal
part is just a very small part of the
cultural aspect of the retribution
campaign. So, I don't know. We'll see
what's next, but the good news is that
legally none of it has worked.
>> What about look look forward for a
minute. What about the liberal anxiety
heading into the midterms around
elections and election power? Cuz this
too is an area where Trump has
threatened to or put out, you know, sort
of executive orders suggesting like
federal takeovers of election law. Does
that follow the same pattern that you've
just described where it it's only works
on paper?
>> He puts out this executive order about
mail-in ballots and the Constitution
quite clearly says that states control
their elections subject to regulations
by Congress. So, once again, we're back
to the same question that we've been at,
you know, again, through the Obama
administration, through the Biden
administration, through the Trump
administration. A president wants to do
something, can't get it done with
Congress, so they go find some vague old
statute and are like, "Oh, Congress gave
me this power like decades ago. Don't
worry too much about it."
Uh signs an executive order, and then,
of course, the whole thing winds up in
court. The difference for Trump is that
the old statutes that he's finding
are less persuasive, are sort of even
harder to justify. And I think his his
election executive order that he did uh
was even flimsier on paper than a lot of
these others. But again, I hope it shows
people we don't want government by
executive order because either the court
will say the president doesn't have the
power to do that,
or more likely, it's just that the next
guy will get rid of it on day one. So,
if you think about climate change, Obama
has his clean power plan, Trump repeals
it, Biden comes into office, he doesn't
just put Obama's back into effect, he
has his own.
And then Trump comes back into office.
Like, this is no way to run a railroad.
We take one step forward, we take one
step back. We take one step forward, we
take one step back. We're just dancing
at this point.
>> Right. But I mean,
the biggest reason though
that
you think it's reached this end point,
this this failure, is that the Supreme
Court, the courts generally, but the
Supreme Court in particular, have, you
know, said no repeatedly, right? To
over over and over again. And this is
sort of the difference between where we
are now versus where we were a year ago
is that we have a lot of concrete
examples of the Supreme Court saying no
to Trump. Can you put those together
with the cases where the Supreme Court
has said yes to Trump on executive
power, of which there have also been a
lot, and those got a lot of the
attention early on?
Is there a coherent Supreme Court
approach to the Trump administration
that sort of makes sense of
the range of decisions that we've had?
>> Yes.
Um, again, the wins that Trump has had
have all been on that emergency docket,
interim docket, shadow docket, whatever
we're calling. So, the wins have been,
what will the status quo be while this
case is working its way through? Does
the policy go into effect or does the
policy not go into effect while we
decide whether the policy is
constitutional?
Um, Biden had fewer of these executive
orders, so there were just fewer of
these emergency cases.
Um, and he, you know, would win one on
the interim docket but lose it in the
end and vice versa. So, there's nothing
particularly new and those interim
decisions can be quite messy. It's very
important to understand the denominator
for Trump. So, like at one point there
were these glaring headlines that Trump
had won 17 cases in a row, but they
choose which cases they appeal. There
had been about 120 that they did not
appeal. They just took the L and lost.
And so, as a percentage,
um,
you know, Donald Trump isn't actually
doing that well even on those. But,
the conservative legal movement has long
had this idea of independent agencies.
Like, that's not a thing.
Uh, and you can go back to Justice
Kavanaugh's writings as a baby circuit
judge, where he talks about the problem
of presidents running on what they're
going to do with the economy and then
getting into office and realizing they
actually have no say over all these
parts of the economy. And as a result,
you've created redundancies in the
executive branch, where parts of the
Department of Justice do the exact same
thing as the Federal Trade Commission.
The difference is the president controls
the lawyers in the Department of Justice
in a way he doesn't control the Federal
Trade Commission. And so, there's, uh,
you know, if you're a a corporation or
even a person trying not to break the
law, you're just in a total mess.
There's no political accountability.
That has long existed out there.
What has happened is Donald Trump is
actually willing to, you know, test the
waters in it. And so, of course he's
winning on those things because
conservatives have been writing about
them for decades. And what's funny is
before that it was liberals writing
about them as well.
>> You mean that when liberals were more
likely to win the presidency, there was
more scholarship, liberal scholarship
arguing, wouldn't it be nice if the
president had more control over all his
independent agencies.
>> Right, I mean, Chevron doctrine, this
idea that courts just defer to whatever
the agency thinks its own power is, was
Scalia. Like that was a a conservative
thing that now conservatives are like,
"Ooh, Chevron deference."
Uh so, things evolve over time, I guess.
>> Coalition shift. Yes. I've noticed that.
So, okay. So, so basically
the court's understanding of
presidential power is
as you're describing it, sort of maximal
presidential freedom in terms of
what federal agencies and elements of
the executive branch are told to do, and
then
limits where?
>> Maximal presidential freedom within the
executive branch and minimal
presidential freedom vis-à-vis Congress.
Uh and it's funny, you think about the
court decides these individual, you
know, questions in cases.
But there's also these larger trends.
Because they decide what cases they
take, they almost can, you know, be on
multi-year journeys, projects.
>> Sculpting
Sculpting a a new, yeah.
>> And so, it matters where they think the
constitutional problems are emerging.
For a long time, the problems I think
they felt were emerging were coming from
Congress having too much power vis-à-vis
the states. This is like the commerce
clause issue. And so, in the '90s, you
see the court start saying like, "No,
no, no, no, no. Congress is a of limited
powers and uh you know, just because
Congress wants to do it, doesn't mean it
can. Some things are reserved to the
states and the federal government
doesn't have any say."
But by the time you get to the Roberts
court
the problem seems to be emerging from
somewhere else. It's not that Congress
is doing too much, it's that Congress is
doing too little. And so, now you see
the court on this 20-year journey to try
to rein in the president in the hopes,
you know, think of it like little
siblings and like, you know, the big
sibling is just like sitting on the
little one and he can't breathe. Uh you
know, the court is trying to get the
president to stop sitting on Congress.
They can't make Congress do its job, but
they can hope that if it's very clear
that the president cannot solve these
problems, you know, if a president runs
on student loan debt forgiveness and
there's a bill pending in Congress and
it doesn't pass and then the president
just does it by executive order, you're
not going to have Congress try to pass
bills anymore. If one side knows they
can get everything they want through
executive order, they don't need to
compromise and so the court has been
involved in this multi-decade process to
say, "Nope. You cannot do it that way.
You must go back to the negotiation
table."
We haven't seen Congress actually take
them up on that offer yet.
>> Well, right. Yeah, we'll we'll we'll get
to that question of what happens if the
court's attempts to sculpt the
constitutional order
don't get cooperation. But just just to
to keep with this with this thread. So
basically you're saying that there is
this sort of fundamental continuity
between
the court saying that Joe Biden's
attempt to forgive large amounts of
student loan debt is unconstitutional
because it is
policy making that should be reserved to
Congress and the case of of the court
saying no to Trump on tariffs.
Just drill down a little bit on tariffs.
Why was that case
a situation where
the court could say, "It doesn't matter
how much power Trump has over
his own executive agencies, he doesn't
have this power."
>> Yeah, I mean, again, to go back to my
sibling analogy, like we're in a road
trip and uh the chief justice is driving
and the two kids are in the back and
they keep poking each other. Uh the
the chief turning back, you know, to the
to the two kids is like, you know, Mr.
President, like, stay in your seat. Your
seat includes all of these agencies.
They're not independent of you. You will
have more control over them, but they
will have less control over anything.
And Congress, like, stop trying to give
away all your stuff to the presidency
just cuz you don't want to do it
anymore.
>> Right, cuz Congress isn't in the
analogy, Congress isn't poking the other
sibling. Congress is like, here, here,
take my take my toy.
>> and then crying that they don't have any
toys. Now, again, you go back to that
progressive era when Congress started
giving away this power, they did keep
two strings, right? One was this idea
that they'd be these independent
agencies so the president wouldn't have
the power to fire them. And the other
was this idea of a legislative veto that
Congress at any point could vote on what
those independent agencies do and give
it a thumbs down.
What the court has done, I think, that's
been really unhelpful for this
constitutional balance, is they've taken
away those safeguards
without taking away the power. So, the
power keeps accumulating in the
executive branch as Congress's strings
evaporate. So, you know, the court got
rid of the legislative veto in the
1980s. So, now Congress had no, you
know,
>> Right, and what that means in practice,
right, is that Congress can't override a
president's tariffs without like having
a 2/3 majority.
>> Without Yes, without a veto-proof
majority.
Um and of course, as they're getting rid
of the independence of these agencies,
same thing, right? The president becomes
more powerful,
but the powers of those agencies are now
huge.
And you know, Justice Kagan has
mentioned this in oral argument, should
we strike down the whole statute, like,
the existence of the Federal Trade
Commission, not just its independence,
for instance? And there's something to
that argument. Uh so, you have this more
powerful presidency
>> In in the sense of the Federal Trade
Commission, what? By its very existence
infringes on congressional power? What
what would be the what would be the
argument for
>> That Congress created a bundle of
sticks, right? And the bundle of sticks
included the legislative veto, the
independent agency, and all of this
power.
>> Right.
>> You don't get to take out two of the
sticks and then feel like you can just
keep that stick because the sticks all
came together. They're a bundle. It's a
bouquet. And so Kagan's point is let's
just strike down the whole thing and
make Congress start over. The problem
that you'll see over and over again
though is, you know,
this was meant to be a conversation
between the president and Congress and
the courts. If the court decides a
statute means X instead of Y or decides,
you know, the bundle of sticks, you get
this stick but not that stick, Congress
can then jump in and say, "No, no,
that's not what we meant. We actually
meant this and not this." The problem
that we keep having is that no one
thinks Congress will do that. So, the
court becomes the last word on these
questions and that doesn't really work
either.
>> Um
I want to get to
the question of what kind of powers the
president has in the face of Supreme
Court opposition because that is
something that I think is also connected
to
the powers that the court has said the
president has including on presidential
immunity. But let's try and do it by
sort of walking through a couple of
looming cases, right? What just just
very very quickly. Tariffs are obviously
the biggest place where the courts have
said no to the president.
>> Correct.
>> You expect them to say no on birthright
citizenship, too.
>> Absolutely.
>> And what will be the court's argument or
reasoning in that case? Quickly.
>> Well, this is the problem for the
administration. Uh they have to win on
like five different grounds to win it
all and the other side just needs to win
on one. So, one version of this is what
we've been talking about. Congress did
not give the president the ability to
redefine this. They have a statute in
1952. It has the same language as the
14th Amendment. All persons born in the
United States and subject to the
jurisdiction thereof shall be citizens.
Um and that the court will just say like
look if Congress wants to make some more
refinements in that like for instance,
you know, someone who's been here on a
tourist visa for under 6 months, their
child is not automatically a citizen.
Well,
we'll see that when it comes and maybe
that is or maybe that isn't
constitutional but regardless the
president acting alone has no ability to
do this whatsoever. We're not going to
be flimflamming around with executive
orders on who's a citizen in this
country.
The president is saying his is only
prospective. What if the next president
says his is retrospective? What a mess.
Um another version is that they just
like get to the root of it and say uh
the 14th Amendment which has that
language that I just told you, um it
actually already settled this question
and it's everyone except for diplomats
uh basically because subject to the
jurisdiction thereof just means
you're here, we could arrest you for a
crime.
>> who doesn't have immunity.
>> Right. Um so we're done with that. Uh
and I think that would garner different
majorities on the court. The chief has
wanted to make narrower rulings with
larger majorities but you can also see
in this case them wanting to settle the
question once and for all and not dare
Congress to pass a law and then just do
this all over again.
>> So you but you would guess anywhere from
seven to two to nine to zero?
>> Correct.
>> Okay.
>> and that's the range.
>> That's the range. Okay, good. Good.
Well, we'll you know, we it's all I I
like getting actual predictions in these
conversations. Um what else looms
besides birthright citizenship that you
think bears on any of the questions
we've been talking about?
>> So two big cases, they're like
culturally big cases but I think they're
court big cases for this like separation
of powers conversation is the mail-in
ballot case about whether Mississippi
can have a state law saying that they
accept mail-in ballots five days after
election day.
Uh the question is whether Congress, you
know, in saying that there is an
election day meant
as one of the advocates said, you must
consummate the election on election day,
not just have voted, but that vote needs
to be received by a state election
official.
Or
election day doesn't mean anything in
particular other than you need to vote.
Um and states can make these rules as
they see fit. Some states can have it
two days, some states have can say,
"Nope, just election day." And
Mississippi can stay five days.
What's interesting about that case to me
is again, the court being the last word
is what's making this all a problem.
Uh and so I'll be very interested to see
whichever way the court comes out, how
the other two branches respond to that.
Because again, I think the court's
trying to jump-start these branches into
actually responding to them. The other
case that's similar to that is the
asylum case, whether someone who arrives
at the southern border can apply for
asylum no matter what or whether the
administration can prevent them from
getting to the turnstile
and therefore say they do not get to
apply for asylum. Again, it's only about
a congressional statute and how what
Congress meant and how the court applies
that in this fact pattern. Congress
could clarify it tomorrow. Instead of
saying arrives in the United States,
they could change it to arrives at a
port of entry or is in the physical, you
know, contiguous United States. Like But
that is all But that is so
>> a great example of an area where a
different Republican president coming
into a landscape where the prior
administration had used a more liberal
interpretation of this law to you know,
basically
not basically, to allow the largest wave
of migration in recent American history.
A different Republican administration
would have come in and said, "Okay, we
have this asylum law that you know, Joe
Biden used in this ridiculous way. Let's
change the law." And Trump has done
nothing like that. There's no
>> Nothing.
>> revision of the asylum laws pending in
Congress, anything like that. He's just
assuming that you can buy an executive
power with a friendly Supreme Court. But
in this case, maybe it will work and he
will get the policy outcome
that he wants.
>> Maybe, but again, if you actually care
about this issue and you agree with the
Trump administration, the next
Democratic president to come in can snap
their fingers and change it immediately.
So, you haven't really won anything and
you also haven't lost anything and
that's the problem that we seem to have
right now. What makes Trump kind of
unique is that Joe Biden actually did
try to move legislation about student
loan debt forgiveness.
>> Right.
>> It failed. It failed.
>> Uh Obama tried to move legislation on
immigration, it failed. Trump hasn't
even tried and remember before uh the
election in fact, he told Republicans
not to vote for immigration uh
legislation changes because
one gets the sense he wanted to do
government by executive order because
this is more fun.
>> Yes.
So, in the end
most likely there'll be some victories
for Trump, but there'll be two really
large defeats. Birthright citizenship
and tariffs, both very big issues.
Birthright citizenship is more important
to the Republican base or the
conservative base. Tariffs are obviously
close to Trump's own heart.
A year ago, there was a lot of
conversation, including on this show,
about what it would take for Trump to
defy the court. Um
in practice, you know, you've had a
sequence of setbacks for the president
that have been met by, you know, angry
tirades on social media, some attempts
to do end arounds, but basically Trump
has accepted the power of the court to
block him.
Does that continue? Is there any
scenario where
Trump acts Andrew Jackson style in
defiance of the Supremes?
>> Not in any of the cases we have yet,
really, because what, you know, first of
all,
>> Well, he hasn't done it yet, but on
birthright citizenship, for instance,
right?
>> the cases that we have pending to talk
about, there's not really an option to
defy the court. Um the court has really
been defined over the course of our
entire American experiment by being at
odds with powerful presidents. My
argument would be this is actually built
its legitimacy as an independent branch.
You know, there's only been 17 Chief
Justices, and there's been like 50
presidents. These guys look around and
they're like, we will outlast you and
the next guy and the next guy, like no
problem.
Like on birthright citizenship, for
instance, if the Supreme Court, as I
predict, uh says no, Donald Trump cannot
do that through executive order,
that's sort of the end of it for Donald
Trump.
>> Well, just just to walk through the
maximally sort of paranoid scenario,
because I think, you know, there's a lot
of people who read the New York Times
who enter to know
who entertain these scenarios, right?
The The one thing we haven't talked
about is
the court's ruling
about broad executive immunity, right?
From from prosecution and legal action.
This was a big ruling before Trump came
into power. I think there's an argument
that the court saw it as much at
protecting Biden from Trump prosecuting
him as protecting Trump, but regardless
of that,
I think with that in the background, the
sort of the fear the fears of what a
president can do have just gotten
stronger. There's just this sense that
like, well, the court gave the president
all this immunity, and so can't he use
that to
issue crazy pardons and do all kinds of
things knowing that in the end, even if
it doesn't work, he won't be prosecuted.
What do you make of that argument? Cuz
it certainly Trump has not been shy
about issuing corrupt pardons.
>> Uh, nope.
>> Right. So, so just
how would you reassure someone, if you
would reassure them, that that is
unlikely?
>> If one were giving a president good
legal advice, they would say that that
immunity decision should have no bearing
on how you act. You should act as if it
never happened, because we do not know
what immunity this actually gives you.
Whatever immunity Donald Trump, or any
president, may enjoy, and I really think
of the immunity decision as like a
preface to a future immunity decision.
You just don't know a lot based on that.
There's so many unanswered questions.
Um, so I wouldn't rely on that at all,
if I were giving legal counsel to a
president, especially if the president
was like, "Hey, I'll pardon you for a
future crime you commit on my order to
ignore the Supreme Court decision and
affirmatively do this thing." Um,
you know, those people are going to go
to jail. And then they can argue about
it, and I just don't think there's going
to be a lot of executive branch
officials that are going to enjoy
playing roll the dice with President
Trump.
>> Okay. Let's talk then about the court
itself for a moment, since we've been
talking about its powers and how it
shapes the country, but obviously it
does not exist. Nine people exist,
right? And this is, you know, part of
what your book does is trying to tease
out the actual power dynamics inside
this incredibly powerful institution.
So,
just briefly, how do you see the court
divided right now, beyond the broad
conservative majority, liberal minority
split?
>> So, I love comparing Justices Gorsuch
and Kavanaugh, because they're so
similar. I mean, they're both the sons
of powerful DC mothers. They go to the
same high school. They work in the W
administration. Oh, I forgot to mention,
they clerk at the Supreme Court the same
term for the same justice.
They go on the circuit court at the same
time. They go on the Supreme Court
nominated by the president uh same
president within an 18 months of each
other. They are Federalist Society lab
creations
uh that are, you know, given the
imprimatur of perfect conservative
justice.
Kavanaugh was more likely to agree with
every other justice including Sotomayor
and Kagan.
Like Jackson is the one exception than
Gorsuch. Um so, you've got to come up
with some other way other than ideology
to explain why these guys repel each
other in opinions. They are the only two
justices to switch spots between the
federalizing the National Guard case
that Trump lost and the tariff case that
Trump lost.
>> But allowing for that kind of
uniqueness,
it still seems to be the case that you
do have a kind of three-three-three
>> Totally.
>> division on the court. Three justices
who seem to the casual observer at least
further to the right, three who are
conservative but center-right and move
back and forth function as swing votes
and three who are more liberal. Is that
how you would define
the three the three groupings?
>> Not quite. I think, you know, what you
just described is a horizontal
ideological spectrum, but I think
there's a vertical one as well that, you
know, I've said is institutionalism.
Um you can think of it as
respect for precedent, thinking of the
court as a single voice,
um thinking of, you know, its legitimacy
and credibility over time and through
the other branches.
Uh but that's a spectrum as well and
it's temperamental, it seems, more than
anything. Uh and yet we see presidents
spend so much time thinking about that
horizontal axis and making sure they
have someone who is going to rule the
right way on these whatever the specific
culture war issue of the day is when in
fact that vertical axis
um
is responsible for which cases the
Supreme Court decides to take how
narrowly or broadly they decide them
whether you know it's 6-3 or 7-2 or 8-1
or 5-4 that has a lot more to do with
that axis and it's interesting that
presidents haven't seemed to notice that
yet.
>> Give me just two contrasts one
conservative and one liberal of people
who are high versus low on
institutionalism.
>> Yeah, you bet. So uh Kagan and Kavanaugh
are both high institutionalists.
Um they are going to moderate their own
positions to get larger majorities on
the court. They're far less likely to
write separate concurrences with their
own sort of idiosyncratic views of the
law. Justice Kagan has called
concurrences a hey I've got a thought
and I want to share it. Um
you know she pooh-poohs the very idea of
having these concurrences.
Low institutionalists my
non-institutionalists
Gorsuch and Jackson certainly. I've
referred to Justice Gorsuch in the book
as the great concurrer
uh after of course the great dissenter
John Marshall Harlan. Um they're going
to write separately about their own
views of the law. They're not going to
care very much about precedent. What
those guys decided isn't my problem.
This is what I think of this case right
now. Um and they're not going to think
very much about the court as an
institution over time. Again, that leads
you to make bad decisions that take into
account all sorts of things that aren't
your job. Your job is just to read the
Constitution says what the Constitution
says the end. Those are my low
institutionalists.
>> But there's still also just
a you know a a pretty clear sort of 333.
Or maybe I mean, yeah, Gorsuch I I agree
is maybe maybe he's unclassifiable.
The first three are the most
conservative in any
Just sort of casual. Yeah, let's just be
let's be simplistic.
>> casual.
>> Well, no. I mean, I I cuz I I just think
it's
>> Okay.
>> to to insist upon the evidence of our
eyes and ears. Yes, the justices cross
lines all the time and have all kinds of
eccentricities. But in the end it on the
big cases as you would say, there's
three justices who are the furthest to
the right, there's three who are center
right, and there's three who are
liberal, right?
>> I'm not sure that Thomas, Alito, and
Gorsuch are more conservative
than the Chief, Kavanaugh, and Barrett.
>> Okay.
>> I do think that they are more
idiosyncratic in the book I call them
conservative honey badgers. Like they
are each soloists, you know? Um but
depending on the issue, they can move
all around about the conservativeness,
and it goes to this definition of what
conservative is, and they don't even
agree on that. Uh and I think it's going
to be really hard for anyone to predict
the outcome of cases if all they think
about is ideology and which justices are
more conservative than the other.
>> Which Which of the middle ground
justices do you think is the most
influential? Cuz again, I grew up in a
world where
for a long time the only thing you
needed to know to figure out how the
court was going to rule was to
psychoanalyze Sandra Day O'Connor and
Anthony Kennedy.
>> Right.
>> And then O'Connor retired, and for a
little while it was just like Anthony
Kennedy is in charge of the Supreme
Court. He is our philosopher king, and
so on. There's no philosopher king out
of Roberts,
uh Kavanaugh, and Barrett. But is there
a justice that you think is the defining
justice of the court right now?
>> I love the question of who is the most
influential justice because it gets to
this very interesting question over what
it means to have influence over time.
So, yes, Justice Kennedy was very
influential over how cases turned out.
If we're just doing that metric, it's
Kavanaugh. He is in the majority more
than any justice in the modern era, more
than Justice Kennedy even was. So,
>> That's really interesting.
>> check that as an answer. On the other
hand, when we look at that era of the
court, we don't think of Justice Kennedy
as being influential in the legal
project. We think of Justice Scalia as
being the most influential. And so, in
that sense, I think you can come closer
to understanding the project that
Justice Jackson
thinks she is doing, or Justice Thomas,
for instance, with text, history, and
tradition. She's in the majority less
than any justice some terms.
Um and yet, we do think of him as being
quite influential because it's not
always about being the fifth vote and
being in the majority.
>> Right, but Kennedy wasn't influential
long term in part because he did play
the philosopher king, and each decision
seemed to be emanating from this kind
his kind of very idiosyncratic and
personal reading of the state of the
American soul.
Someone like Barrett, though, is in the
same kind of position as Kavanaugh or
Kennedy before her, but is a, you know,
sort of Scalian
hardcore theorist. So, when she's in the
majority, she's trying to ground
the decision in theory, I think to a
greater degree than Kavanaugh or
Roberts. So, does that mean that you
would bet on her as the influencer uh uh
just out of that group?
>> Yeah, she is certainly, you know, like
the Dos Equis guy, the most interesting
justice in the world, um because she is
on this formalism project.
>> All interesting times guests are, you
know, the most interesting people in the
world. So, I'm glad to hear that she
qualifies. Go on.
>> For sure.
Uh she's on this formalism project,
right? She is doing something different
than Justice Scalia was. She's doing
something different than the other
justices are.
And what makes it interesting is while
being very conservative, if you were to
plot that, you know, spectrum on kind of
any definition of Federalist Society
conservative, she has ruled against the
Trump administration more than the other
conservative justices. Uh, Gorsuch, by
the way, has the distinction of ruling
against the government more than any
justice cuz he's our like libertarian
justice.
>> By the way, he's against he's against
Biden. He's against Trump. He's against
them all.
>> Yeah. I love he's the solo dissenter in
this IRS tax case that's like, who
cares? Uh, except he was like, no, screw
the IRS. Like,
they're always the bad guys.
Um, so, uh,
what Barrett is up to is what everyone
is watching, even though she's not the
most likely to be the fifth vote, but
because there's this sense that she is
moving the court more than just as the
deciding vote.
>> So, what then what about the liberals?
So, you are you already mentioned,
right, that Justice Jackson is clearly
playing for the long term in the sense
of writing dissents that,
you know, there's no chance she's going
to get large any of the conservative
justices to ever sign on to. But, the
theory is you are basically trying to
establish a view of all of these
decisions that will be available
to future a future liberal majority when
it comes time to unwind
the decisions of the conservative court.
Talk about her, but then talk about how
that's different from what
certainly than what Justice Kagan is
doing, and I'm curious where you think
Justice Sotomayor fits in that. Cuz, you
know, what what you do in dissent is
very interesting generally, I think.
>> Well, let's just make sure we level set
on their seniority. So, if you're in the
majority, it's the senior most justice
in the majority who gets to assign the
opinion. And if you're in dissent, the
senior-most justice in dissent gets to
assign the dissent. Justice Sotomayor is
the senior-most of the liberal justices,
and so in that sense, she is the great
dissenter of this court. She's going to
write the dissents
in those big cases, the principal
dissent.
Justice Jackson, though, is writing a
whole lot more in sort of a like, "Hey,
but also,
you know, voice," where there might be a
principal dissent from Justice
Sotomayor, and then you get another
dissent from Justice Jackson. Again,
she's anti-institutionalist.
She sees her job as fundamentally
different. Every justice signs their
name into the flyleaf of John Marshall
Harlan's Bible before they take office.
His portrait sits in the conference as
they vote. She is the justice that they
will all tell you is their North Star.
He is the sole dissenter in Plessy v.
Ferguson upholding Louisiana's separate
railroad car. Posterity now says that he
was obviously right.
And it's this idea that in the moment,
you shouldn't be caught up in the
culture and what the majority tells you
and how you were raised or anything
else. Your job is only to say what the
Constitution demands, and that is when
the court is at its best. And so every
justice wants to be John Marshall
Harlan. Every justice wants to avoid
being Roger Taney, the chief justice who
decides Dred Scott. And the question is
how they all are trying to navigate to
do that, and for
>> But but many of them don't want to be
John Marshall Harlan all the time,
right? And so this is
this is the balance where you look you
if you look at Justice Kagan, it seems
very clear that she is trying to
envision a liberal jurisprudence
that could take over the court if you
just flipped a seat or two.
>> Right.
>> Whereas Justice Jackson is envisioning a
liberal jurisprudence that would require
five seats to flip. And that that's very
different, right?
>> Yeah, last term we saw several 7-2
decisions where Kagan
separates from Sotomayor and Jackson.
Even the Child's case this term on
conversion therapy and the First
Amendment was 8-1. Jackson is still by
herself.
You know, Jackson's not crazy though.
After FDR left office, there were nine
Democratic appointees on the Supreme
Court. As recently as 1992, there were
eight Republican appointees on the
Supreme Court. These swings happen
faster than I think we think. And so,
Justice, you know, the
the liberal
jurisprudential set has really been
struggling to find what's going to
replace living constitutionalism. They
are all doing versions of textualism and
originalism, especially now that uh
those
methodologies
are against what Donald Trump is doing.
Right. So, the
as the liberals search for what that
jurisprudential methodology is going to
be,
Jackson is trying to
define one, and Kagan is trying to
define a different one. She is the
strategic justice.
>> Right.
>> She's constantly trying to remind the
other justices, "Don't forget, you want
to be consistent. Remember this other
thing that you did.
Find consistencies in that, or look at
this originalist argument. Aren't you an
originalist? You know, what if we take
this out and just narrow this decision?
What if we don't take this case?" So,
she is winning
all sorts of things behind the scenes,
and Jackson is like, "No, I'm not doing
strategy. We're not doing behind the
scenes. I'm not narrowing apertures. Who
cares about apertures?
Uh I'm going to write in nearly every
case."
>> Do you think that's mostly an
intellectual or a temperamental
difference?
>> Temperamental. Yes.
>> So, it's just like the kind of person
you are coming into the court matters as
much or more than your sort of formal
>> Yes.
>> jurisprudential commitments.
>> have been caring so much about these
ideological commitments. They haven't
paid attention to the temperament at
all. And the temperament is defining
which cases the court is taking and how
narrowly or broadly they're deciding
them far more than the ideological
stuff.
>> Temperament also connects to
one of the biggest decisions justices
make, which is when to leave, right? Um
a decision that, you know, famously
reshaped the court in a profound way uh
when Ruth Bader Ginsburg decided to hang
on for one more term.
There's a lot of talk
actually about both Samuel Alito and
Clarence Thomas, but it's mostly about
Alito potentially retiring now
with
a situation where, you know, a
Republican president can appoint his
replacement and a Republican Senate can
confirm one, which may not obtain for
two years, four years, much beyond that.
Do you think he's going to retire?
>> It is such a close call.
There's just no indications that Justice
Thomas wants to leave. That's why we're
all like ignoring that possibility. Um
Justice Alito, there's just evidence on
both sides. On the one hand, he has, you
know, twin grandbabies and he's never
seemed like much of a people person. On
the other hand, uh you know
>> that means he doesn't like the twin
grandbabies. You never know, right? I
mean, no, everybody Everybody likes
their twin grandbabies. I I apologize to
the justice for the imputation. Go on.
>> Uh
you know, he has this book coming out
and that set tongues wagging because the
book's release is for that first week of
oral argument. And on the one hand, uh a
book is going to sell
>> next In the next term. Yeah.
>> Yes, in October. On the one hand, this
is his first book. Um a book is going to
sell much better if you're an active
Supreme Court justice.
>> Right.
>> On the other hand, you know, you're not
doing a book tour because it's during
that week that you're sitting for oral
argument. But of course, this is Justice
Alito not doing a book tour is a
feature, not a bug.
So, hard to know. Um
that being said, like we're certainly
all making our short-lister lists and
taking bets at all the same.
>> Well, then let's talk about
those bets about potential replacements,
right? Because the dynamic on the right,
we've just been talking about the
dynamic among liberals, but the dynamic
on the right
is itself incredibly complicated because
on the one hand, you have sort of
the normal range of
ideological possibilities.
You want, you know, another lab-grown
Federalist Society justice. Do you want
someone who sort of represents the kind
of common good constitutionalism that
some conservative theorists have
embraced. But then you have Trump
himself who is really angry about the
justices he picked who Leonard Leo and
the Federalist Society handed to him,
and they've all betrayed him in various
ways. Uh and he, you know, I don't think
it's would be
it's not a
it's not false at all to assume that he
wants a yes-man hack and a crony on the
Supreme Court. Um
so what what do you get out of that
combination? What kind of nominee?
>> When we look at the circuit nominations
that Donald Trump has made, they all
look remarkably similar, and they are
all of a first-term ilk. Um they all
have the same resumes that, you know,
Federalist Society judges have always
had. By the way,
I'm becoming increasingly convinced that
that is a bad thing. We are so narrowing
>> Right.
>> the resumes that one may have. So, by
that measure, it sure looks like his
Supreme Court nomination would come from
the circuits. And, you know, Judge Andy
Oldham on the Fifth Circuit clerked for
Justice Alito, and currently three of
the nine justices replace the justice
that they clerked for. The chief
replaced the former chief, Justice
Kavanaugh replaced Justice Kennedy,
Justice Jackson replaced Justice Breyer.
Um so, that's why he is probably at the
top of everyone's short list right now,
but that's not necessarily a great
thing.
>> Right. But still, it does seem like
Alito has been
the justice most likely to side with the
Trump administration in a lot of key
cases. Um he's also a serious, respected
jurist and not seen as, you know, crony
or yes-man. So, it seems like the Alito
mold
is the place where Trump's desire for
court support meets who can actually get
confirmed, right? Like, give me a name.
Who Who does Trump nominate where
it's perceived as just a Trump pick and
Senate confirmation is in doubt.
>> So, I think the just a Trump pick is
probably Solicitor General John Sauer,
but what's interesting about him is that
he would get confirmed quite easily. He
has the shininess of the resume while
having the, you know, shown loyalty to
Trump. Elena Kagan was of course
Solicitor General and had not been a
circuit judge before she went on the
court, so John Sauer would easily be
following in that model.
Um you know, I think that the if we want
to keep moving along that spectrum, you
probably get to Todd Blanche next.
>> Who is the acting attorney general in
the wake of Pam Bondi's firing?
>> Right. Um you know, there's Eileen
Cannon, the district judge, who ruled in
favor of Trump in some questionable
motions and areas involving the
classified documents case. I hear her
name mentioned a lot, but most of the
time people sort of giggle afterwards,
like it would be a troll, but Trump's
not opposed to trolling.
>> Um
your book is an endorsement of the court
as an institution in the sense that you
argue that in a difficult situation, to
put it mildly, it's serving the country
well.
I agree that I think the court is doing
a decent job under difficult
circumstances, but I did come of age
with a common conservative view that
said that it's a bad thing for American
democracy
to have so many crucial questions,
culture war questions maybe especially,
but not only them, settled in the final
analysis by five to four votes from a
bunch of increasingly Ivy League
lawyers.
Um and I'm still sympathetic to that
view even though now that final say
aligns more often, much more often, than
it did 20 years ago with my own
political preferences. What What about
you? Were you a court skeptic 15 years
ago in that sense?
>> Oh, I think everything you're saying is
still true and completely consistent
with the idea of this institution being
the last branch standing. This is the
problem we face, which is you need
Congress to get back in the game for
this whole thing to work. The court
cannot stand as an institution by
itself. And by the way, I defend the
institution. That doesn't mean you can't
criticize decisions of the court or
think decisions were wrong. It's more
about like abolish the Supreme Court
stuff doesn't make sense when the
Supreme Court is the only
counter-majoritarian branch we have,
which is to your point. Um it has to use
that counter-majoritarianness
um sparingly. It is not meant to stand
athwart being nine platonic guardians
saying, you know, here's what we think
is the the better answer. Uh President
Lyndon Johnson famously said, "Why amend
the Constitution when Justice Douglas
can do it in an afternoon?" We don't
want that, and that's the imperial court
you're talking about. I don't think we
have an imperial Court by necessity. I
think we have an Imperial Court by
choice because we are not
voting. We are not creating the
incentives to bring in congressmen who
legislate.
>> But to to the extent that that
that choice is being made under
conditions where,
you know, the Constitution, at least as
interpreted through Marbury versus
Madison, and there are other other
interpretations, but as interpreted
through judicial review, you know, it
does US Supreme Court has sweeping power
relative to lots of other modern
democracies. Like it it's an unusually
powerful court. And some people would
say, "Well,
the problems of presidential power, the
atrophying of congressional power,
they're what you'd expect when the
system
by its nature pools certain kinds of
power in the judiciary in this way. Like
you get abdication from Congress for a
reason." And those people, again, they
used to be on the right, now they're on
the left more.
would smite say,
"Maybe if we
weaken the court to some degree or
weaken the power of the justices, right?
And, you know, you have term limits, for
instance, or you you change the way in
which,
you know, the way in which the court is
constructed,
maybe that drains some power from it,
and then that power flows back to
Congress. What what do you make of that
argument?"
>> I suggest several reforms at the end of
the book. We could end forum shopping
tomorrow. I think that's incredibly
dangerous for the judiciary as a branch.
This idea that you can pick which judge
hears your case. I don't care how fair
that judge is. If everyone knows one
side picked you, you're not going to
look very fair. And we could easily fix
that. Having a binding ethics code. I
suggest amendments to the Constitution,
the first one of which should be make
amending the Constitution easier. Um by
the way, also make the impeachment
conviction level lower. So, again,
creating more accountability and a
little more churn like what I think you
want. What I would caution people about
is, you know, look at Chesterton's nice
fence over there. Before you start
tearing it down, make sure you know
what's on the other side of the fence.
So, with term limits, for instance, it
sounds nice. Every president would get
two picks on the court. Those justices
would serve for 18 years. It would
create a lot more um consistency.
>> Right. You wouldn't be relying on quite
literally the workings of divine
providence to decide when a justice dies
and when there's a big shift on the
court.
>> There are lots of conservatives and
liberals who are term limit curious. I
would like to disabuse them of that
notion based on what the second and
third order effects will be. First of
all, if every president automatically
gets two picks, those two people will
eventually uh be named ahead of time.
And eventually, they will end up being
part of a ticket campaigning with the
president. You will have the president,
the vice president, and, you know, two
Supreme Court justices. That will change
who becomes a Supreme Court justice like
it's changed who becomes a president. We
no longer pick the best president, we
pick the best person at running for
president. Second, when those people are
ready to leave office after 18 years,
they are going to want another job. What
if they want to be attorney general?
Would you trust their decisions in
advance of them leaving the court if
they're angling for a cabinet spot? What
if they want to go join a corporation
for a lot of money?
What if the other justices know, you
know, this president has been elected,
he's about to get his second pick on the
court on, so let's hold these cases
until that justice is on because we
think they'll decide it better. Um it
will make the court less independent. It
will make trust in the court, I think,
deteriorate quite a bit. And remember,
the court isn't meant to be
democratically accountable. It's meant
to be counter-majoritarian to protect
the First Amendment or the Fourth
Amendment. We want it to stand against
these bare and fleeting majorities in
our pluralistic society. And if you get
a big enough majority, you amend the
Constitution. If you get a long enough
majority
and the culture has changed, you get new
justices on the Supreme Court that
reflect that as well. Um but beware of
changing the incentives of these
justices
because its independence is the
superpower.
>> So, I buy that argument to some degree.
I can certainly imagine all kinds of
unintended consequences that flow from
turning the Supreme Court into a
term-limited enterprise.
I guess I just wonder, you know, when
you describe a better world that
involves big changes to the amendment
process or things things like that,
that seems fairly unrealistic to me. And
when I when I look ahead from where we
are to where we're going, it seems like,
you know, Donald Trump probably is not
going to pick a constitutionally
existential fight with the Supreme Court
in part just because he's really
unpopular
right now and he doesn't have the oomph
to pull it off.
But it just seems to me like over a
longer time horizon,
you have an imperial presidency and we
won't call it an imperial court, but you
have a very powerful court and a
weakened Congress.
It just
I just sort of foresee some kind of
constitutional crisis in our future
driven by this sort of court versus
president collision. And I like the
court right now and I don't like the
president, but the president is elected
and the court is not.
And so, I'm just not I'm not sure how
all of that turns out. So,
that's less a question than a than a you
know, a sort of a a well, a sort of
gloomy a sort of gloomy prophecy and I'm
curious if you have
to carry us out a more optimistic take
on the next 15 years of judicial
history.
>> I think our politics is turning and
politics, of course, is downstream from
culture. Uh you know, reality
>> a whirlpool, surely. Everything's
downstream of everything else, but no,
go on.
>> Uh reality TV viewership is dropping off
a cliff and perhaps we are done with our
reality TV era of candidates as well. Uh
and it will take a little while, but
when people realize over over over that
these executive orders aren't actually
working, we're not solving any of the
problems. I look at the primary race in
Texas between Talarico and Crockett in
the Democratic primary for Senate. And
Crockett ran a very traditional, you
know, what I'm calling this reality
TV-based candidacy, looks a lot like
Donald Trump with, you know, some
different policy priorities. Talarico
ran a very Ted Lasso campaign,
optimistic, he had campaign mechanics,
you know, on the ground type organizing.
Um and Talarico won in the end. And if
that's a harbinger of things to come, we
could actually have a functional
Congress and the court can recede uh
back into just being part of the
conversation instead of the last word in
the conversation.
And the other thing I'll just add is
historically,
this is not the biggest threat the court
has faced in history. That absolutely
goes to Thomas Jefferson when he
impeaches Samuel Chase for being a
partisan hack, basically, with the goal
of eventually impeaching uh Chief
Justice John Marshall and ending the
Supreme Court before it began. It did It
was not the organization or the
institution we think of it as today at
all. Um it, you know, Marbury versus
Madison, the ink was still wet on. So,
this idea of what it was, what it would
be, what its value was in our system,
was all up for grabs. And Jefferson
wanted it to be a reflection of politics
and of these elections. That's the
biggest threat. So, the court, you know,
has faced off with
greater presidents than this. Lincoln,
FDR.
I I think the institution will survive
just fine if we understand it better.
>> All right. Sarah Isgur, thank you so
much for joining me.
>> Thanks for having me.